initial draft of a TLSPolicy (#345)
Kuadrant/multicluster-gateway-controller: docs/proposals/TLSPolicy.md

# WIP
# TLSPolicy API
Currently, TLS certificates issued by the MGC are issued and managed using `cert-manager`. Configuration for these certificates are opague to the end-user - we'd like to gradually expose a TLSPolicy to cover a range of use-cases where administrators require more flexibile configuration.

## Problem

> Gateway Administrators require a comprehensive way to manage Automated, ACME-based TLS for Gateways. As gateways multiply and scale, there's a need for a flexible, policy-based API for handling Automatic TLS. Currently (July 2023), the MGC sets up automated TLS whenver a HTTPRoute is created. There are currently no hooks into the creation of automated TLS certificates, nor user-exposed configuration options in terms ACME providers, custom renewal windows/schedules, key size / algorithm and other configuration options available via `cert-manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateway Administrators require a comprehensive way to manage Automated, ACME-based TLS for Gateways. As gateways multiply and scale, there's a need for a flexible, policy-based API for handling Automatic TLS. Currently (July 2023), the MGC sets up automated TLS whenever a Gateway listener is created. There are currently no hooks into the creation of automated TLS certificates, nor user-exposed configuration options in terms ACME providers, custom renewal windows/schedules, key size / algorithm and other configuration options available via `cert-manager`.
```

**Setting the TLS Certificate Renewal Window**: As an admin, I need to define the renewal period for TLS certificates (e.g., every 90 days) and a lead time for renewals (e.g., 15 days before expiration).

**Choosing a TLS Strategy**: As an admin, I want to employ different strategies for managing certificates (e.g., multiple host certificate or per host certificate).

**Choosing a TLS Strategy**: As an admin, I want to be able to apply enterprise security standards to certificates generated by the MGC. I want to be able to specify certificate key size, algorithm and encoding.

## Current implementation

## Goals

- Design an API that allows admins to handle Automatic TLS for any given gateway.
- Facilitate easy selection of a TLS provider.
- Allow admins to set the renewal window for TLS certificates.
- Enable the use of different TLS strategies.
- Consider additional TLS configurations such as enforcing HTTPS listeners and supporting wildcard hosts.

## Non-Goals

- Detailed implementation of the API.
- Developing a working prototype of the API.

> - Identifying specific technologies or tools for implementing the API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Identifying specific technologies or tools for implementing the API.
- Abstracting cert-manager Issuer/ClusterIssuer configuration.
```

The API will also consider additional TLS configurations, such as enforcing only HTTPS listeners and supporting wildcard hosts. This means any gateways using this class would have any non-HTTPS listeners flagged, removed, or not synced, etc. 

**Note** This proposal effectively moves us away from having a "default" TLS policy, baked into the MGC. From here on, unless a TLSPolicy is defined, MGC will not do anything with TLS, and control will remain with the user to solve.

## Gateway Interaction

The TLSPolicy API will interact with Gateway operations, such as adding and removing TLS configurations for a listener based on the host. This allows for dynamic management of TLS configurations for each Gateway and its listeners. The API will utilize the existing Gateway methods for adding, removing, and checking TLS status.

## Example Policies

1. **Policy**

```yaml
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: TLSPolicy
spec:
  targetRef: # defaults to gateway gvk and currrent namespace

>     name: gateway-name

Reviewer 2: Targeting Gateways makes sense until a different use case is clear.

>   duration: 2160h # 90d - certificate validity period

Reviewer 2: I'm assuming these fields map to fields in the [Certificate spec](https://cert-manager.io/docs/reference/api-docs/#cert-manager.io/v1.Certificate)?

Would be good to have sensible defaults (e.g. what's used now) to ease the 'getting started' experience.

Open question if the TLSPolicy should embed the types directly from cert-manager (hard dependency) or copy them.

Author: agreed @david-martin. Yeah, I've made these more closely map to the certificate spec recently. I'm hoping a working PoC will help me flush out an answer on embedding types from cert-manager or copy them, I'm unsure right now.

# WIP
# TLSPolicy API
Currently, TLS certificates issued by the MGC are issued and managed using `cert-manager`. Configuration for these certificates are opaque to the end-user - we'd like to gradually expose a TLSPolicy to cover a range of use cases where administrators require more flexible configuration.

## Problem

Gateway Administrators require a comprehensive way to manage Automated, ACME-based TLS for Gateways. As gateways multiply and scale, there's a need for a flexible, policy-based API for handling Automatic TLS. Currently (July 2023), the MGC sets up automated TLS whenever a Gateway listener is created. There are currently no hooks into the creation of automated TLS certificates, nor user-exposed configuration options in terms ACME providers, custom renewal windows/schedules, key size, algorithm and other configuration options available via `cert-manager`.

## Use Cases

> **Choosing a TLS Provider**: As an admin, I want to select a specific ACME provider for the TLS certificates in a particular gateway.

Reviewer 3: Should this be more focused on Cert Manager Issuers that ACME providers? The majority of issuers are more than likely ACME, but not all of them. Self Signed cert issuer for instance aren't ACME.

Author: Good point. I think it should be more focused on cert-manager issuers, rather than plain ACME ones as you say.

**Setting the TLS Certificate Renewal Window**: As an admin, I need to define the renewal period for TLS certificates (e.g., every 90 days) and a lead time for renewals (e.g., 15 days before expiration).

**Choosing a TLS Strategy**: As an admin, I want to employ different strategies for managing certificates (e.g., multiple host certificate or per host certificate).

**Choosing a TLS Strategy**: As an admin, I want to be able to apply enterprise security standards to certificates generated by the MGC. I want to be able to specify certificate key size, algorithm and encoding.

## Current implementation

## Goals

- Design an API that allows admins to handle Automatic TLS for any given gateway.
- Facilitate easy selection of a TLS provider.
- Allow admins to set the renewal window for TLS certificates.
- Enable the use of different TLS strategies.

> - Consider additional TLS configurations such as enforcing HTTPS listeners and supporting wildcard hosts.

Reviewer: I think it should be a goal that TLS is not managed unless a TLSPolicy is specified. By default TLS will be the responsibility of the gateway admin. If they want us to take that on they can create a TLSPolicy.
Perhaps not part of this, but we prob need to handle listeners that are not backed by a MZ IE something directly handled by the admin for a CNAME for example or self managed DNS. 
@mikenairn interested in your opinion here? We might not have to start here but we will need to handle a listener that is not backed by a zone in a graceful way

Reviewer 3: I would need to go and check what we currently do for TLS, but I'm not seeing where ManagedZones comes into it. DNSPOlicy does require that records are created in a known hosted zone, but the TLSPolicy wouldn't since it would be (i expect) created with it's own cert manager Issuer reference, with provider credentials added in the usual cert manager issuer way to deal with challenges. 

Maybe I'm missing the point, quite possible.

Reviewer: Yeah good point, so when setting up cert-manager issuer you would provide it with a credential. The listeners hosts would have to be in the same DNS provider as with the current design only one issuer per gateway would be allowed. But I agree that we don't need to tie to the existence of a managed zone

Reviewer 3: I see, yes we are limiting it to only one listener. I think this comes back to the issue that we have already talked about and being able to apply polices to listeners, rather than just at the Gateway level.

I guess we could hook it into the ManagedZone somehow :thinking:, although I'm not totally sure how that would work, or if we really want that.

Reviewer: There is potentially a complex relationship here
1) I choose an issuer in the TLSPolicy and that applies to all listeners
2) some of the listeners are backed by a zone in a different provider 

I think having to have a managed zone setup before using a policy may be the wrong user experience https://github.com/orgs/Kuadrant/discussions/7

## Non-Goals

- Detailed implementation of the API.
- Developing a working prototype of the API.
- Identifying specific technologies or tools for implementing the API.

> - Abstracting cert-manager Issuer/ClusterIssuer configuration.

Reviewer 3: On this, is this in reality going to be a CertManagerTLSPolicy? Regardless of naming, i expect it is, so would we ever want to abstract these?

Reviewer 2: This is in non goals

Reviewer 3: Yeah, i suppose since it was here it felt like it was something you aren't doing now but might do later.

If this is tightly coupled to cert-manager, I'm wondering do we need to reflect that in the naming of it, or at least make it more obvious in the wording of this proposal. Probably not, prefer just TLSPolicy tbh, but just putting it out there.

**Note** This proposal effectively moves us away from having a "default" TLS policy, baked into the MGC. From here on, unless a TLSPolicy is defined, MGC will not do anything with TLS, and control will remain with the user to solve.

## Gateway Interaction

The TLSPolicy API will interact with Gateway operations, such as adding and removing TLS configurations for a listener based on the host. This allows for dynamic management of TLS configurations for each Gateway and its listeners. The API will utilize the existing Gateway methods for adding, removing, and checking TLS status.

## Example Policies

1. **Policy**

```yaml
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: TLSPolicy
spec:
  targetRef: # defaults to gateway gvk and currrent namespace
    name: gateway-name
  duration: 2160h # 90d - certificate validity period
  renewBefore: 360h # 15d - certificate renewal buffer in hours
  PrivateKey:
    Algorithm: RSA # certman.RSAKeyAlgorithm
    Encoding: PKCS1 # certman.PKCS1

>     Size: 2048

Reviewer: hmm expected to see an issuer property here?

Reviewer 3: My understanding would have led me to expect the same. I almost feel like that's the main thing we want to allow people to select through the policy.

TLSPolicy in dev just references the self signed cert issuer, or are we expecting that the policy would manage the creation of everything for you? :thinking: This might be nice, but probably completely unrealistic for a first pass, the options we would have to provide to create a vaid Issuer in cert manager would be huge .

Reviewer: yes self signed in dev. Issuer is expected with this policy as it stands

Author: I'll drop an updated copy of this when I generate the CRDs
